Announce JUnit external storage (#4505)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2021/08/2021-08-14-introducing-junit-external-storage.adoc

---
:layout: post
:title: "Introducing external storage for JUnit test results"
:tags:
- cloud-native
- pluggable-storage
- junit
:author: timja
:sig: gsoc

> // opengraph: // TODO

Author: needs image

//   image:
links:

> //   discourse: TODO

Author: will add when close to merging

---

In common CI/CD use-cases a lot of the space is consumed by test reports.
This data is stored within `JENKINS_HOME`,
and the current storage format requires huge overheads when retrieving statistics and, especially, trends.
In order to display trends, each report has to be loaded and then processed in-memory.

The main purpose of externalising Test Results is to optimize Jenkins performance and storage
by querying the desired data from external storages.

I'm please to announce that the plugin:junit[JUnit Plugin] external storage is now available for use.

== Getting started

Install your database vendor specific plugin, you can use the Jenkins plugin site to search for it:

> https://plugins.jenkins.io/ui/search/?labels=database

Reviewer: Beware that https://plugins.jenkins.io/database/#dependencies shows this to be incomplete: https://plugins.jenkins.io/database-drizzle/

Author: It's missing a label to show up, but not sure if it should be encouraged, it has no docs and hasn't been released in 9 years

=== From Jenkins UI

Navigate to: Manage Jenkins → Configure System → Junit

In the dropdown select 'SQL Database'

image:/images/post-images/2021/junit-external-storage/junit-sql-config-screen.png[JUnit SQL plugin configuration]

Now configure your Database connection details.

Search for 'Global Database' on the same 'Configure System' page.

Select the database implementation you want to use and click 'Test Connection' to verify Jenkins can connect

image:/images/post-images/2021/junit-external-storage/junit-sql-config-screen.png[JUnit SQL plugin database configuration]

Click 'Save'

=== Configuration as code

If you want to configure the plugin via plugin:configuration-as-code[Configuration as Code] then see the below sample:

[source,yaml]
----
unclassified:
  globalDatabaseConfiguration:
    database:
      postgreSQL:
        database: "jenkins"
        hostname: "${DB_HOST_NAME}"
        password: "${DB_PASSWORD}"
        username: "${DB_USERNAME}"
        validationQuery: "SELECT 1"
  junitTestResultStorage:
    storage: "database"
----

=== Using the plugin

> Now run some builds, here's an example pipeline configuration to get you started if you're just trying out the plugin:

Reviewer: https://github.com/jglick/simple-maven-project-with-tests might be more helpful?

----
node {
  writeFile file: 'x.xml', text: '''
  <testsuite name='sweet' time='200.0'>
    <testcase classname='Klazz' name='test1' time='198.0'>
      <error message='failure'/>
    </testcase>
    <testcase classname='Klazz' name='test2' time='2.0'/>
    <testcase classname='other.Klazz' name='test3'>
    <skipped message='Not actually run.'/>
    </testcase>
  </testsuite>
  '''
  junit 'x.xml'
}
----

You will see a test result trend appear like below on the builds project page:

image:/images/post-images/2021/junit-external-storage/junit-trend.png[JUnit Trend]

If you check on the controller's file system you will see no `junitResult.xml` for new builds.

If you connect to your database and run:

`SELECT * FROM caseresults;`

You will see a number of test results in the database.

== What happens to existing test results?

Existing test results will stay on disk but will not be loaded.

Currently there is no migration scripts or plugin functionality to do this, if you need it then please raise an issue.

== How are test results cleaned up

When a job or build is deleted the related test results are removed.

This is expected to be done as part of a 'Build Discarder'.

> If you wish to keep your results longer than this you can disable this feature by enabling:

Reviewer: FWIW `artifact-manager-s3` not only defaults to ignoring Jenkins build deletion events, but does not offer such an option in the GUI/CasC (only an unsupported system property).

Author: I ignored it initially but had a few requests, and people saying they wouldn't use it without some type of cleanup 🤷 , mostly just awaiting more feedback in this area on what people need

`Skip cleanup of test result on build deletion` on the system configuration page.

If you need more complex cleanup strategies built into the plugin then please raise an issue.

== API

The API is defined at:

* jenkinsdoc:junit:io.jenkins.plugins.junit.storage.JunitTestResultStorage[]
* jenkinsdoc:junit:io.jenkins.plugins.junit.storage.JunitTestResultStorageDescriptor[]
* jenkinsdoc:junit:io.jenkins.plugins.junit.storage.TestResultImpl[]

`JunitTestResultStorage#load` is passed a job name and build which can be used to construct an instance of the external storage implementation.

This implementation will then act on that job and build except for the optimised calls that act across all builds.

The API contains the basic methods like `getFailCount`, `getSkipCount`, but also APIs that are optimised for retrieving data for the trend graphs on the job page and the test result history page.

> These allow single API calls to be done for what used to be a lot of work for Jenkins to lookup before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These allow single API calls to be made for what used to be a lot of work for Jenkins to look up before.
```
